## Against Belief, or, the Liturgies of the Classroom

What are compositionists to do with religion? In their introduction to [a *Present Tense* bibliography on religion and composition](http://www.presenttensejournal.org/volume-6/twenty-five-years-of-faith-in-writing-religion-and-composition-1992-2017/), Paul Lynch and Matt Miller note that "the story of the problematic religious student is told again and again." Composition scholarship often depicts composition instructors committed to critical thinking and free inquiry at odds with religious students whose commitments to drawing on their faith in academic writing clash with academic norms. This encounter recurs in the literature from early narratives by Chris Anderson and Douglas Downs to Heather Thomson-Bunn's recent analytical work, which interviews composition instructors to reveal what Lynch and Miller call "familiar perceptions: the students don’t distinguish between faith and facts; they write only to like-minded audiences; they cite the Bible uncritically; they are intolerant toward those who do not share their attitudes." Lynch and Miller find the frequency of these conflicts decreasing over the past twenty-five years as composition instructors have found new ways to negotiate and understand religious discourses in the classroom, whether through pragmatism (DePalma, 2011), monster theory (Vander Lei, 2015) or casuistic stretching (Ringer, "Consequences" 2013). Yet Thomson-Bunn's 2017 study demonstrates that a sense of conflict persists between composition instructors and certain of their religious students. 

Though scholars like Michael-John DePalma, Elizabeth Vander Lei, and Jeffrey M. Ringer have proposed invaluable means of improving relations between composition instructors and their problematic religious students, the field has yet to fully investigate the root causes of this conflict. DePalma identifies "disciplinary biases" as a challenge to taking religious seriously in the classroom (220), and Ringer observes how the pluralism of a secular university may threaten a religious student's belief in absolute truth ("Consequences," 275). These are certainly reasons that an encounter between a composition instructor and a religious student might be fraught, yet neither DePalma nor Ringer investigates them extensively. Moreover, it is not clear to me that either of these causes quite accounts for the intensity of emotion evinced by the literature on this subject. Patricia Bizzell’s “Faith-Based Worldviews as a Challenge to the Believing Game,” highlights this emotion in a discussion of Peter Elbow's "believing game." Reflecting on the reaction an instructor might have to a tasteless or offensive student essay, she writes:

> The academic can play the believing game up to a point. . . . But what if he is asked to inhabit a position that arouses emotion in him? This is disturbing, by the very fact that emotion of any kind is being aroused–emotion is taboo [in academic modes of thought]–but even more so if the emotion is repugnance or fear. (Bizzell 29)

Bizzell argues that the strong emotion religious arguments can prompt in academics highlights a need to better theorize the role of emotion in academic discourse and its effects upon encounters between composition instructors and religious students. If a student’s religious belief is merely a matter of “students’ rights to their own language,” as Bizzell claims (34), or if we can accommodate such beliefs through pragmatism, as DePalma argues, we ought not to find a given student’s desire to think with and within a particular religious tradition especially troubling. Yet emotions like Bizzell's "repugnance or fear" continue to haunt compositionists' responses to religious students. Even in an essay as sympathetic to these students as Ringer's "The Consequences of Integrating Faith into Academic Writing," these emotions surface. Recounting the conclusion to his interviews with evangelical student Austin, Ringer confesses: "I'm bothered by the simplicity of Austin's interpretation. I'm bothered that he doesn't seem to be confronting the dilemma he bumped up against in his writing, that his Christian perspective might be one among many. . . . In short, I'm bothered that Austin saw his faith as influencing his education but not the opposite" (291-92). If Bizzell's analysis of emotion as taboo in academic discourse is correct, Ringer's honesty about his emotion is admirable. Yet it shows that however far the field has come, the problematic religious student continues to provoke strong feeling. 

In order to reckon with that emotion as productively as possible, we need clarity about its sources. Emotion in composition has been better theorized since Bizzell complained about lack of reflection on the topic (see Rivers, 2011; Winans, 2012; Kurtyka, 2017) including specific work on instructors' emotions in assessment (Caswell, 2014). Yet investigation into the causes of the specific emotion described by Bizzell and Ringer—emotion provoked by religious students or their arguments—has yet to occur. It would seem that the field has taken it for granted *that* interacting with religious students may provoke strong emotion in instructors without fully examining *why.*

This oversight may be traced to our framework for engaging with religion, which centers on belief rather than practice. Bizzell identifies "faith-based worldviews" as the challenging aspect of engaging with religious students, while Ringer's work centers on concepts of "faith" and "dogma" (in addition to "Consequences," cited above, see his essay "Dogma of Inquiry"). Yet composition instructors confront differences of worldview (if not precisely those of faith or dogma) all the time. If religion is particularly powerful in its ability to prompt emotion, I contend that this is so not because of the power of religious worldviews or dogmas, but because composition and religion alike are concerned not just with beliefs but *liturgies*: kinaesthetic-aesthetic structures that inculcate a narrative about the world, that shape embodied ways of life as well as teaching beliefs. Composition instructors and religious students alike draw their self-understandings from these liturgical structures, and thus their conflicts arise not just from differing views, but differing—and sometimes even rival—habits, aesthetics, and ways of living. If the classroom is not merely a place of competing worldviews but competing liturgies, then a high degree of emotional involvement is not only to be expected, it is built in. 

Understanding encounters between composition instructors and religious students as concerned with clashing liturgies—not just worldviews—can help us better understand, and thus better manage, the emotions provoked in these situations. In the remainder of this essay, then, I will define my understanding of liturgy; briefly exposit four key liturgical communities that act in the composition classroom; and conclude with two implications for our understanding of religion in the classroom and a gesture toward a new liturgy of the classroom.

### Liturgy as Habit

In the broadest definition liturgy is simply acts of public service to God or gods. However, these acts of worship exist and have significance in no small part due to what they do to the worshippers. James K.A. Smith argues that “a liturgical anthropology is rooted in both a kinaesthetics and a poetics” (*Imagining the Kingdom*, 101). That is, liturgical worship employs bodily practices (kinaesthetics) to inculcate a narrative (poetics). Liturgy works upon the body to spark the imagination, creating an embodied orientation toward an imaginative vision of the good life. On Smith’s account, such kinaesthetic-aesthetic schemes are not just characteristic of religion, but of any cultural project. Entering a stadium shares with entering a cathedral a bent toward bodily practices that involve participants in a story. Going to a mall involves submitting oneself to a cultural liturgy, a kinaesthetics (that is, architecture, bodily motion, light, sound, smell) aimed at fostering participation in a story (I am the kind of person who buys X, Y, or Z). According to this liturgical anthropology, to be a human is to be one who participates in liturgies shaping one’s desires—whether those liturgies are openly religious or not. Furthermore, identity is not largely shaped by worldview, beliefs, or ideas about the world—it is rather shaped by the liturgies, the habits and practices, that people give themselves over to.

In the classroom, then, we should worry less about the various worldviews held by students and instructors, and more about the competing liturgies they participate in. An encounter between instructor and student with divergent views on religion is not just a meeting of two different worldviews, but an encounter of people habituated by different practices and different stories. The misunderstandings and conflicts that arise thus derive not just from differing beliefs, but from two quite distinct ways of life and imaginative visions about how to live in the world.

Moreover, on Smith's understanding, teacher and student alike are shaped by more than one liturgy. The systems of the market and the polis operate liturgically just as surely as the church, as can be seen by the examples of the mall and the stadium. In order to comprehend the encounter between instructor and student, we must do a "liturgical audit" of the systems at work around them and the habits and aesthetics that shape them.[^1]Understanding the interplay of these liturgies—the “liturgical situation,” as we might call it—is a necessary step for refiguring the role of religion in the classroom.

In the most general terms, we can identify four liturgical traditions that have purchase in the encounter between composition instructor and religious student. I make no pretense to an exhaustive treatment here: liturgies proliferate, and each situation calls for its own analysis by the actors immersed in it. However, for the purposes of this essay we will consider the signal liturgies shaping an encounter between instructor and student situated in a university classroom in contemporary America. Each person brings to this encounter their own liturgical formation, with the setting exercising its own liturgical influence as well. 

### Understanding the Liturgical Situation: Four Liturgies

First and most obviously, any religious student holds not only to a worldview, but to a set of kinaesthetic-aesthetic practices or liturgies. Her beliefs and their articulation are shaped not only by dogmas, but by bodily habits and aesthetic associations: church assemblies, Bible studies, hymns, and so forth. These habits, even more than any consciously held beliefs, shape the student’s response to ideas and practices which are foreign to her. Ideas from outside the religious community challenge not just the student’s ideas, but the very shape of her life.

Second, the instructor’s identity as a composition teacher has been shaped by similar forces. These are somewhat more variable and less easy to identify, but we might look at graduate school as a starting point—Timothy Burke has called grad school [“cotillion for eggheads,”](http://www.swarthmore.edu/SocSci/tburke1/gradschool.html) which I think gets at its liturgical aspects: that is, it includes ritual elements (meetings with advisors, social events, annual conferences) designed to create a shared identity among the students. Though Bizzell and others have described that academic identity as located in critique, we might also note that its critical posture is formed by social ties and ways of living. In other words, the teacher’s identity as teacher has much of the same formational power as the student’s identity as a religious person.

Third, consider the liturgy of the modern university. Students and instructors alike move through a planned and managed environment, receive common messages from the administration, follow a calendar particular to their community, and may even eat in the same places. Since these habits are shared and pervasive, and since the class takes place quite literally on the university’s turf, this may be the most powerful influence of all. Both teachers and students see themselves to one degree or another as members of the university community, and while that commonality may offer value in mediating conflict, it can also feel like a threat to the previous two identities mentioned. Moreover, since the university mandates a number of classroom rituals—handing out grades, taking attendance—it can create its own conflict internal to the academic liturgy.

Fourth, consider the pervasive habituating force of modern technocapitalism. Here the actors and influences proliferate, but one valuable liturgical system to discuss might be what Smith calls the “micropractices” of certain technologies. The smartphone, in particular, invites certain “rituals of interaction” that foster a certain story about the world (Smith, *You Are What You Love,* 142). For a compelling visualization of this, Smith cites “a rather inane Michelob Ultra commercial in which the world obeys the touch commands of an iPhone screen. Don’t like that car? *Swipe* for a different one. . . . Wish you could be somewhere else? Just *touch* the place you want to be” (143). Our habits and our students’ habits alike are shaped by such liturgies alongside our more formal religious or professional identities.[^2]

Each of these four liturgies exercises influence on the interaction between skeptical instructor and religious student, as do others, and we need to account for them. I can’t now think through such a complex situation fully, but by way of conclusion let me offer two implications of a liturgical understanding of the situation and a concluding sketch of considerations for the liturgy of the classroom.

### Toward a New Liturgy of the Classroom

The liturgical understanding of the classroom helps us answer the question I started with—why interactions with religious students may be so fraught. If the encounter is merely one of divergent worldviews, well, we think through differences of worldview all the time. It is rather the liturgical grounding of our attitudes about religion and education that make them so intense—the experience is not a meeting of mere ideas, but of two ways of living and two visions of the good life. Even if neither person has any intention of proselytizing for their way, encountering a different liturgy puts our own perspective into question: Charles Taylor argues that such an encounter produces “fragilization” in our views (304). Though understanding the necessarily fraught nature of the interaction will not guarantee us a positive conclusion, we must have this more frank view to proceed appropriately.

Additionally, understanding our own perspective as one which arises from cultural liturgies can empower us as teachers to proceed with greater teacherly (I almost wrote pastoral) sensitivity. Christian liturgist Aidan Kavanagh argues that “Liturgy . . . exists to undercut and overthrow the very structures it uses” (40). By this Kavanagh means that social structures tend to become oppressive on their own, yet the Christian liturgy undercuts those oppressive tendencies with its spirit of high play and commitment to memory. This liturgical antistructuralism ought to characterize any liturgy, not just a Christian one, which seeks the social good rather than oppression or profit. We cannot trust the archbishops of the university or the market to so check their own practices—the liturgies of the iPhone aim not to undercut themselves, but rather quite the opposite—yet for the health of our own community of teachers we must maintain such liturgical antistructuralism in the habits we build into our teaching practice. Even where we believe that our methodologies lead to better learning or even to justice, we must create habits that undercut the tendency of our own practices to become oppressive.

An antistructural liturgy for the composition classroom, like other healthy liturgies, will necessarily be contextual and likely quite detailed. Characterizing such a liturgy in full thus not only lies beyond the scope of this essay, but outside its purview. However, compositionists who seek to conduct a liturgical audit of their classrooms in pursuit of a more intentional classroom liturgy might ask themselves some of the following questions:

- What phrases and terms do the instructor and students use most frequently in the classroom? Whose liturgies and visions of life do they most reflect?
- What other liturgies do the instructor and students participate in outside their life in the classroom? How do these shape their complementary or conflicting identities and desires?
- What habits of movement do teachers and students participate in while in class? How do those rituals shape the purpose of the class?
- What aesthetic factors (the appearance of the room, presence of media, etc.) shape the liturgy of the classroom? Whose goals do they serve?
- How do the liturgies of the university enter the classroom? What are their effects on the goals of the class? Are there ways teachers and students could participate in those liturgies differently in order to forge mutual understanding and a common vision, or to produce more productive disagreements?
- How do the liturgies of the market enter the classroom, whether through the micropractices of digital technologies or other means? What are the effects of those practices on the liturgy of the classroom?

Composition instructors who wish to forge a productive liturgy of the classroom must consider these and many other factors. Looking beyond beliefs and worldviews, we must begin with the insight that teachers and students alike are liturgical animals, subject to kinaesthetic-aesthetic regimes as well as ideas and values. By such habits of thought and action, we can begin to construct religion in the classroom not as an external, disruptive force, but merely another aspect of life together as a community of human persons. And only through that task of liturgically enabled understanding can we achieve a more helpful, irenic encounter between composition and faith.


### Note

[^1] I borrow the phrase “liturgical audit” from Smith’s *You Are What You Love: the Spiritual Power of Habit,* 53.
[^2] Though examining how the liturgies of the smartphone reshape religious or professional identities lies beyond my scope in this essay, one fascinating treatment of the theological import of smartphones and e-readers is Alan Jacobs, "Christianity and the Future of the Book," *The New Atlantis* fall 2011, https://www.thenewatlantis.com/publications/christianity-and-the-future-of-the-book. 

### Works Cited

Anderson, Chris. “The Description of Embarrassment: When Students Write about Religion.” *ADE Bulletin* 94 (1998): 12-15. Print.

Bizzell, Patricia. “Faith-Based Worldviews as a Challenge to the Believing Game.” *JAEPL* 14 (Winter 2008-2009), pp. 29-35. Print.

Burke, Timothy. “Should I Go to Graduate School?” *Easily Distracted,* http://www.swarthmore.edu/SocSci/tburke1/gradschool.html. Web. Accessed 17 Mar. 2017.

Caswell, Nicole I. “Dynamic Patterns: Emotional Episodes within Teachers’ Response Practices.” *The Journal of Writing Assessment* 7.1 (2014), http://journalofwritingassessment.org/article.php?article=76. Web. Accessed 23 Dec. 2017.

DePalma, Michael-John. “Reimagining Rhetorical Education: Fostering Writers’ Civic Capacities through Engagements with Religious Rhetorics.” *College English* 79.3 (2017): 251-275. Print.

Downs, Douglas. “True Believers, Real Scholars, and Real True Believing Scholars: Discourses of Inquiry and Affirmation in the Composition Classroom.” *Negotiating Religious Faith in the Composition Classroom,* edited by Elizabeth Vander Lei and Bonnie Leonore Kyburz, Heinemann, 2005, pp. 39-55. Print.

Jacobs, Alan. "Christianity and the Future of the Book." *The New Atlantis* fall 2011, https://www.thenewatlantis.com/publications/christianity-and-the-future-of-the-book. Web. Accessed 26 Dec. 2017.

Kavanagh, Aidan. *Elements of Rite: a Handbook of Liturgical Style.* Pueblo Publishing, 1982. Print.

Kurtyka, Faith M. “Learning How to Feel: Conversion Narratives and Community Membership in First-Year Composition.” *Composition Studies* 45.1 (2017): 99–121. Print.

Lynch, Paul and Matthew Miller. "Twenty-five Years of Faith in Writing: Religion and Composition, 1992-2017." *Present Tense* 6.2 (2017), http://www.presenttensejournal.org/volume-6/twenty-five-years-of-faith-in-writing-religion-and-composition-1992-2017/. Web. Accessed 22 Dec. 2017.

Ringer, Jeffrey M. “The Consequences of Integrating Faith into Academic Writing.” *College English* 75.3 (2013): 270-97. Print.

---. “Dogma of Inquiry: Composition and the Primacy of Faith.” *Rhetoric Review* 32.3 (2013): 349-365. Print.

Rivers, Nathaniel A. “In Defense of Gut Feelings: Rhetorics of Decision-Making.” *Present Tense* 2.1 (2011), http://www.presenttensejournal.org/vol1/in-defense-of-gut-feelings-rhetorics-of-decision-making/. Web. Accessed 23 Dec. 2017.

Smith, James K.A. *Imagining the Kingdom: How Worship Works.* Baker Academic, 2013. Print.

—. *You Are What You Love: The Spiritual Power of Habit.* Brazos Press, 2016. Print.

Taylor, Charles. *A Secular Age.* Belknap, 2007. Print.

Vander Lei, Elizabeth. “‘Where the Wild Things Are’: Christian Students in the Figured Worlds of Composition Research.” *Mapping Christian Rhetorics: Connecting Conversations, Charting New Territories.* Eds. Michael-John DePalma and Jeffrey M. Ringer. New York: Routledge, 2015. 66-85. Print.

Winans, Amy E. “Cultivating Critical Emotional Literacy: Cognitive and Contemplative Approaches to Engaging Difference.” *College English* 75.2 (2012): 150–170. Print.